Exploratory Data Analysis(EDA) with R Programming

Last Updated : 13 Aug, 2022
Proudly written by Ing.Ernesto Ibanez.

Exploratory Data Analysis or EDA is a statistical approach or technique for analyzing data sets.
This in order to summarize their important and main characteristics generally by using some visual aids.
The EDA approach can be used to gather knowledge about the following aspects of data:

Main characteristics or features of the data.
The variables and their relationships.
Finding out the important variables that can be used in our problem.

EDA is an iterative approach that includes:

Generating questions about our data
Searching for the answers by using visualization, transformation, and modeling of our data.
Using the lessons that we learn in order to refine our set of questions or to generate a new set of questions.


Exploratory Data Analysis in R.

In R Language, we are going to perform EDA under two broad classifications:

Descriptive Statistics, which includes mean, median, mode, inter-quartile range, and so on.
Graphical Methods, which includes histogram, density estimation, box plots, and so on.


Before we start working with EDA, we must perform the data inspection properly. 
Here in our analysis, we will be using the loafercreek from the soilDB package in R. 
We are going to inspect our data in order to find all the typos and blatant errors. 
Further EDA can be used to determine and identify the outliers and perform the required statistical analysis.
For performing the EDA, we will have to install and load the following packages:

“aqp” package
“ggplot2” package
“soilDB” package

We can install these packages from the R console using the install.packages() command and load them into our R Script by using the library() command. 
We will now see how to inspect our data and remove the typos and blatant errors. 
BY EXAMPLE write in RStudio console install.packages(“soilDB”) +  library(soilDB)


Data Inspection for EDA in R
To ensure that we are dealing with the right information we need a clear view of your data at every stage of the transformation process. 
Data Inspection is the act of viewing data for verification and debugging purposes, before, during, or after a translation.
Now let’s see how to inspect and remove the errors and typos from the data.

Come from : https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/exploratory-data-analysis-in-r-programming
HAVES SAMPLE R CODE!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!


Descriptive Statistics in EDA 
For Descriptive Statistics in order to perform EDA in R, we will divide all the functions into the following categories: 

Measures of central tendency
Measures of dispersion
Correlation

Data Inspection for EDA in R
To ensure that we are dealing with the right information we need a clear view of your data at every stage of the transformation process. 
Data Inspection is the act of viewing data for verification and debugging purposes, before, during, or after a translation.

 Measures of Central tendency. Under this section, we will be calculating the mean, median, mode, and frequencies.
 
 Measures of Dispersion. In this category, we are going to determine the spread values around the mid-point. 
 Here we are going to calculate the variance, standard deviation, range, inter-quartile range, coefficient of variance, and quartiles.
 
 Correlation. In this part, all the calculated correlation coefficient values of all variables in tabulated as the Correlation Matrix. 
 This gives us a quantitative measure in order to guide our decision-making process.
 
 
 
Graphical Method in EDA 
Since we have already checked our data for missing values, blatant errors, and typos, we can now examine our data graphically in order to perform EDA.
We will see the graphical representation under the following categories: 

Distributions
Scatter and Line plot

Distributions, we shall examine our data using the bar plot, Histogram, Density curve, box plots, and QQplot. 

Scatter and Line plot. In this category, we are going to see two types of plotting,- scatter plot and line plot. 
Plotting points of one interval or ratio variable against variable are known as a scatter plot.
Under the Distribution, we shall examine our data using the bar plot, Histogram, Density curve, box plots, and QQplot.


Outliers result from various factors including participant response errors and data entry errors. 
In a distribution of variables, outliers lie far from the majority of the other data points as the corresponding values are extreme or abnormal. 
The outliers contained in sample data introduce bias into statistical estimates such as mean values, leading to under- or over-estimated resulting values.

Types of Missing Values

According to previous studies, missing values are divided into two categories: missing completely at random (MCAR) 
and no missing at random (NMAR), depending on the types of missingness that occurred.
Dealing with outliers is essential prior to the analysis of the data set containing outlier.

(#1) https://palomar.home.ece.ust.hk/MAFS6010R_lectures/slides_data_cleaning.html
(#2) https://stackoverflow.com/questions/64401468/calculate-euclidean-distance-with-r
(#3) https://www.statology.org/transform-data-in-r/
https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/wiki

Data wrangling.
Sometimes referred to as data munging or data cleaning, is the process of transforming and mapping data from one "raw" data form into another format.
With the intent of making it more appropriate and valuable for a variety of downstream purposes such as analytics.

Data wrangling.Steps    #https://hevodata.com/learn/data-wrangling/
Step 1: Data Discovery
Step 2: Data Structuring
Step 3: Data Cleaning
Step 4: Data Enriching
Step 5: Data Validating
Step 6: Data Publishing


data.table 
https://www.machinelearningplus.com/data-manipulation/datatable-in-r-complete-guide/   by  Selva Prabhakaran

Mahalanobis distance #1
Euclidean distance   #2
res <- data.frame(
  pair = paste(rownames(df)[s], rownames(df)[(s+1)], sep="-"),
  dist=out)
head(res)



 

